95 CATECHISM QUESTIONS & ANSWERS
Q: What is the Bible?
A: The Bible is the collection of books that relate God’s revelation to the human race. It is the inspired word of God written by men and comprises the Old Testament and the New Testament.
Q: Where did we get the Bible?
A: We have the Bible by the authority of the early councils of the Catholic Church which decided which writings were truly inspired by God. Therefore the Bible may rightly be said to be a Catholic book.
Q: When there is dispute over what the Bible means to teach us about
A: some matter of faith or morals, how do we know the right meaning? Only the teaching authority of the Catholic Church can know what is true in faith and morals because Christ promised that the Holy Spirit would reveal all truth to the Church.
Q: What is the teaching authority of the Church called?
A: The teaching authority of the Catholic Church is called magisterium.
Q: What is Sacred Tradition?
A: Sacred Tradition is the oral, unwritten message that Jesus gave the Apostles. Some of it was written down and is found in apostolic documents that are not part of the Bible.
Q: In what degree must we accept the Bible? In what degree Tradition?
A: One must accept the Bible and Tradition completely and equally because both are revealed by God.
Q: What is the Blessed Trinity?
A: The Blessed Trinity means that in the one God there are three distinct and equal Persons: the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit. 8 What do we mean by the equality and distinction of the divine Persons? The three divine Persons are perfectly equal to one another because all are the one and infinitely perfect God. The three divine Persons are really distinct from one another. They are not three names for the same Person, nor are the three Persons blended into one another. This means The Father is not the Son. The Son is not the Holy Spirit. The Father is not the Holy Spirit.
Q: What are Angels?
A: Angels are pure spirits, without bodies, having intelligence and free will.
Q: What are good angels; what are bad angels?
A: The good angels are those who remained faithful to God, and entered into the eternal happiness of heaven. The bad angels are those who turned against God and were cast into Hell. These are the fallen angels or devils.
Q: What is a guardian angel?
A: A guardian angel is a good angel who has been assigned to each one of us by God to watch over, lead, guide, and protect each of us in all we do.
Q: What is man? How is he like God?
A: Man is a creature composed of body and soul, and made to the image and likeness of God. Man is like God chiefly in the soul.
Q: What was the condition of Adam and Eve before the Fall and after the Fall?
A: The original condition of Adam and Eve was that they were in perfect harmony with God, and were given sanctifying grace, which made them children of God and gave them the right to heaven. They were also free from sickness and death. After the Fall they were deprived of God’s friendship and grace, they were subject to sickness and death, and their wills were inclined to sin.
Q: What is the sin of Adam and Eve Called? How do we get it? How do we remove it?
A: The sin of Adam and Eve is called, Original Sin. We all, children of Adam, come into the world with Original Sin. It is removed when we are baptized.
Q: When we have Original Sin removed, what effects of it remain in us?
A: The inclination to sin still remains in us because our nature was weakened by the Fall.
Q: What is the difference between temptation and sin?
A: Temptation is a strong inclination or suggestion to sin which may come from the devil, from something outside us, or from our tendency toward evil as a result of Adam’s fall. Sin is knowingly and willingly breaking the law of God, not merely the inclination to commit evil.
Q: Can temptation always be resisted?
A: Temptation can always be resisted because God will not allow us to be tempted beyond our strength.
Q: What is mortal sin; what three elements are necessary to it?
A: Mortal sin is a grievous offense against the law of God that deprives us of grace and leads to eternal death in hell. The three elements necessary to make a mortal sin are: First, the thought, desire, word, action or omission must be seriously wrong or considered seriously wrong; Second, the sinner must be mindful of the serious wrong; Third, the sinner must fully consent to it.
Q: What is venial sin; What makes up venial sin?
A: Venial sin is a less serious offense against the law of God, which does not deprive the soul of sanctifying grace, and which can be pardoned even without sacramental confession. There are two conditions that make up a venial sin: First, when the evil done is not seriously wrong; second, when the evil done is indeed seriously wrong, but the sinner sincerely (but falsely) believes it is only slightly wrong, or when he does not give full consent to it.
Q: What are the occasions of sin? What are the near occasions of sin?
A: The occasion of sin is any person, place or thing which may lead us into sin. The near occasions of sin are all persons, places, or things that may likely lead us into sin.
Q: What are the main sources of the sins people commit?
A: The main sources of the sins people commit are the seven capital sins: pride, avarice, envy, anger, lust, gluttony, and sloth.
Q: Who is Jesus Christ? Is he a human person? How many natures has He?
A: Jesus Christ is the Second Person of the Blessed Trinity, the Son of God who became man. No, Jesus Christ is not a human person but a divine Person; Jesus is God. Jesus Christ has two natures: The nature of God and the nature of man.
Q: What is the Incarnation?
A: The Incarnation means that the Son of God became man.
Q: Who is Jesus’ mother? Who is Jesus’ father?
A: The Blessed Virgin Mary is the mother of Jesus. Only God the Father is the Father of Jesus. Saint Joseph was the guardian, or foster father, of Jesus.
Q: What is the Redemption?
A: The Redemption means that Jesus Christ offered his sufferings and death as a sacrifice to make up for the sins of all humanity. By the redemption, Christ gained for man the right to be children of God and heirs of heaven.
Q: What is the Immaculate Conception? What does it mean?
A: The Immaculate Conception was the special privilege granted by God to the Blessed Virgin Mary whereby she was free from original sin from the first moment of her life. Due to a special grace of God, Mary never committed any sin her whole life long.
Q: What do the words “he descended into hell” mean?
A: The descent into hell means that the soul of Jesus, after his death on the cross, descended to the place of rest where the souls of the just had been waiting for him. He did not go to the place of the damned.
Q: What is sanctifying grace? What terms do the Scriptures use for it?
A: Sanctifying grace confers on our souls a new life, that is, a sharing in the life of God Himself. The bible sometimes calls it ‘life’, ‘living water’ or ‘light’.
Q: What is actual grace?
A: Actual grace is a supernatural help of God which enlightens our mind and strengthens our will to do good and to avoid evil.
Q: How do we get sanctifying grace? How do we increase it?
A: We receive and increase sanctifying grace through the worthy reception of the sacraments and through prayer and other good works.
Q: What are the three theological virtues? Explain each.
A: The three theological virtues are, Faith, Hope and Charity. Faith is the virtue by which we firmly believe all the truths God has revealed, on the word of God revealing them, who can neither deceive nor be deceived. Hope is the virtue by which we firmly trust that God, who is all- powerful and faithful to His promises, will in His mercy give us eternal happiness and the means to obtain it. Charity is the virtue by which we love God above all things for His own sake, and our neighbor as ourselves for the love of God.
Q: What are the gifts of the Holy Spirit?
A: There are seven gifts of the Holy Spirit, they are: wisdom, understanding, counsel, fortitude, knowledge, piety, and fear of the Lord.
Q: What is moral virtue? What are the four cardinal (or main)
A: virtues? Give examples of other moral virtues. Moral virtues are habits that help us to lead good lives by treating persons and things in the right way, that is, according to the will of God. The four cardinal virtues are prudence, justice, fortitude and temperance. Other examples of the moral virtues are honesty, courage, self-control, and purity.
Q: What is the Church? Who founded it? How many true churches are there? What is the relationship between other churches and the true Church?
A: The Church is the congregation of all baptized persons united in the same true faith, the same sacrifice, and the same sacraments, under the authority of the Pope and the bishops in union with him. The Church is the Mystical Body of Christ. Jesus Christ founded the Church. There is only one true Church, the Catholic Church. Other churches have a greater or lesser participation in the fullness of truth and grace that is found only in the Catholic Church.
Q: Who is St. Peter? Who are his successors?
A: St. Peter is the Apostle chosen by Christ to be the head, or first Pope, of the Church He founded. The Popes who have been chosen over the centuries succeed St. Peter. They are Christ’s representatives on earth as the lawful successors of St. Peter and visible heads of the Church.
Q: Who are the apostles? Who are their successors?
A: The Apostles were men selected by Christ and sent to preach the Gospel to the world, to forgive sins, and to celebrate the sacraments. Their successors are the bishops.
Q: What are the four identifying marks by which you can be sure of the true Church?
A: The four identifying marks are One, Holy, Catholic (or universal), and Apostolic.
Q: What is infallibility? To what matters does it extend?
A: Infallibility is a guarantee of truth which excludes error, given by Christ to His Church. Infallibility is limited to matters of faith and moral teaching. The official teachings of the Pope are infallible.
Q: The Church teaches that there is no salvation outside the Catholic Church. What does this mean?
A: When we say, “Outside the Church there is no salvation,” we mean that Christ made the Catholic Church a necessary means of salvation and commanded all to enter it, so that a person must be connected with the Church in some way to be saved.
Q: What is excommunication?
A: Excommunication is a penalty by which the Church cuts one off from the sacraments and from union with the Church; an excommunicated person loses his rights but not his obligations.
Q: What is apostasy? What is heresy?
A: Apostasy is the rejection of Christianity. Heresy is the denial of one or more truth of the Catholic Faith. These are mortal sins.
Q: What would it mean to deny just even one article of the Catholic faith knowingly?
A: To deny even one article of the Catholic faith knowingly would be a heresy and a grave sin against the virtue of Faith.
Q: What is a priest? What is a Sister? What is the consecrated laity?
A: A Priest is a mediator between God and man. Having received Holy Orders a priest takes the place of Christ, the High Priest and can offer Mass, forgive sins, and perform the other sacraments of the Church. A Sister is woman religious, living by an approved rule of life. Consecrated lay men and women are bound by vows to Christ and remain unmarried for His sake while living among others in the world.
Q: What is the communion of saints and what is the relationship between them?
A: The communion of saints is the sharing of grace among all members of Christ’s Church, whether they are on earth, in purgatory, or in heaven. The relationship between them is that members of the Church are able to help each other through prayer in the communicating of spiritual benefits.
Q: What is the resurrection of the body?
A: The resurrection of the body is the rising of the human body united
with the soul on the last day of time. It will bring the body to a state of
perfection and glory.
Q: What is the Assumption?
A: The Assumption is the taking up into heaven of the body and soul of
the Blessed Virgin Mary.
Q: How many judgments will God give us?
A: There are two judgments. The first is called the particular judgment
which takes place after one’s death. The second is called the general
judgment and will take place at the end of the world with men and
women from all time.
Q: What is purgatory? How do people get there? How do they get out
A: of there?
Purgatory is a place of temporary punishment for souls that die in the
state of grace but who must be purified of venial sin or of any
temporary punishment still due to their sins before they can enter
heaven.
Q: Will people in hell ever get out?
A: No, the punishment of hell is eternal.
Q: What is necessary for one to get to heaven?
A: One must die in the state of grace, and be completely free of all
punishment due to sin.
Q: What are the two commandments of Jesus?
A: The two commandments of God are: You shall love the Lord your
God with your whole heart, and with your whole soul, and with your
whole mind, and with your whole strength; and, You shall love your
neighbor as yourself.
Q: What are the ten commandments? (by number and in order)
A: The Commandments of God are:
Q: I am the Lord your God; you shall not have strange gods before Me.
A: Q: You shall not take the name of the Lord your God in vain.
Q: Remember to keep holy the Lord’s day.
A: Q: Honor your father and your mother.
Q: You shalt not kill.
A: Q: You shalt not commit adultery.
Q: You shalt not steal.
A: Q: You shall not bear false witness against your neighbor.
Q: You shall not covet your neighbor’s wife.
A: Q: You shall not covet your neighbor’s goods.
Q: What is sacrilege? What kind of sin is it? Give examples of it.
A: A sacrilege is the irreverent treatment, or mistreatment, of sacred
persons, places, or things; it is also the reception of any of the
sacraments unworthily. It is a mortal sin.
Examples of sacrilege are knowingly receiving Holy Communion in
mortal sin; or knowingly not confessing all of one’s mortal sins in
confession.
Q: What is a relic? Are sacred images permitted to be venerated?
A: A relic is the body, or part of the body, of a saint. It is also anything,
such as clothing, associated with the saint which the Church honors
because of the sanctity of the person while on earth.
Sacred images may be venerated. It is a good practice to do this.
Q: What kind of sin is it to miss Mass on Sunday (or Saturday
A: evening) through one’s own fault?
It is a mortal sin against the third commandment to miss Mass on the
days when attendance is obligatory.
Q: What are some spiritual duties of parents towards their children?
A: Spiritual duties of parents towards their children are to teach the
Catholic faith and good morals, and to protect them from spiritual
harm.
Q: Discuss abortion (and its penalties); illegal drugs; alcoholic drink.
A: Abortion is a very grave sin and excommunicates one from the
Church. The use of illegal drugs is always sinful. Alcoholic drink is
sinful only when consumed to excess or when one is forbidden to take
it.
Q: Discuss purity and sins opposed to it (e.g. adultery, fornication;
A: impurity with one’s own body; pornography; immoral music or
movies, contraception, immodesty).
Sins against purity that are fully willed (must understand this) are
always mortal sins.
Q: Discuss sins of stealing, including immoral business practices,
A: cheating in buying and selling and shopping and income tax.
These sins are mortal if the amount stolen or its value equals or
exceeds what is about the worth of a daily wage.
Q: What is restitution? Is it necessary for forgiveness of sins?
A: Restitution is the obligation to pay back whatever is stolen or
damaged. It is necessary to have at least the intention of restitution for
one to be forgiven.
Q: Discuss perjury; slander; detraction.
A: Perjury means lying while under an oath to tell the truth. It is always
a mortal sin.
Slander means telling a lie about one’s character.
Detraction means telling a truth about another’s moral failings or
weaknesses.
Slander and detraction may be mortal sins depending on the amount of
damage done to one’s reputation.
Q: What are the precepts (laws) of the Church?
A: Q: To assist at Mass on all Sundays and holy days of obligation.
Q: To fast and to abstain on the days appointed.
A: Q: To confess our sins at least once a year.
Q: To receive Holy Communion during the Easter time.
A: Q: To contribute to the support of the Church.
Q: What is fasting? What is abstinence? When are these obligatory?
A: Fasting is to take no food or liquid for a certain time. On fast days only
one full meal is allowed, but one or two smaller meals may be taken, if
needed for strength. Fasting is binding on those from ages 18 to 60.
Abstinence is refraining from doing something, especially from eating
certain foods. A day of abstinence is one on which we are not allowed
to eat meat. All Fridays and Ash Wednesday are days of abstinence.
Abstinence from meat is obligatory for Catholics who have passed
their fourteenth year.
Q: What happens when a Catholic marries outside the Catholic
A: Church, i.e. apart from the law of the Church? Can the divorced
remarry?
A Catholic who marries outside the Catholic Church (e.g. by a judge
or a Protestant minister) commits sin and is not married at all.
A divorced Catholic is not allowed to remarry while his spouse is still
living.
Q: What is a sacrament?
A: A sacrament is an outward sign instituted by Christ to give grace.
Q: What are the names of the seven sacraments?
A: The names of the seven sacraments are: Baptism, Confirmation, Holy
Eucharist, Penance, Anointing of the Sick, Holy Orders, and
Matrimony.
Q: Which sacraments can be received only once?
A: Baptism, Confirmation, and Holy Orders can only be received once. A
man, however, may receive each of the three degrees of Holy Orders.
Q: How is baptism given? What does baptism do for you?
A: Baptism is given in this way: the one baptizing pours water over the
forehead 3 times of the one to be baptized, saying, “I baptize you in
the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit.”
Baptism gives us the new life of sanctifying grace by which we
become children of God and heirs of heaven.
Q: What is confirmation? Who usually gives it?
A: Confirmation is the sacrament through which the Holy Spirit enables
us to profess our faith as strong and perfect Christians and soldiers of
Jesus Christ.
The bishop is the usual minister of Confirmation.
Q: What is chrism?
A: Holy chrism is a mixture of olive oil and balm, blessed by the bishop
on Holy Thursday.
Q: What is the Eucharist? When was it first given?
A: Holy Eucharist is a sacrament and a sacrifice. In the Holy Eucharist,
under the appearance of bread and wine, Jesus Christ is contained,
offered, and received.
The institution of this most Blessed Sacrament of Holy Eucharist was
on Holy Thursday at the Last Supper, the night before He died.
Q: Who consecrates the Eucharist? How is it consecrated? What
A: materials are necessary for it?
The priest consecrates the Eucharist.
It is consecrated by the words spoken at the time of the consecration
during the Holy Sacrifice of the Mass: “This is my body...” and This is
my blood...”.
The materials that are necessary are pure wheat bread and wine made
from grapes.
Q: What is transubstantiation?
A: Transubstantiation is the change of the entire substance of the bread
and wine into the Body and Blood of Christ.
Q: Is the whole Christ present in the Eucharist? In each form? In
A: each part of each form?
The whole Christ is present Body, Blood, Soul and Divinity in the
Eucharist.
Jesus Christ is whole and entire under the appearance of bread and
under the appearance of wine and under every particle of each form
that can be recognized as such.
Q: Why do we genuflect and why do we kneel in the church?
A: We genuflect to pay our reverence and respect to God who is present
in the Most Blessed Sacrament of Holy Eucharist reserved in the
tabernacle.
Q: What is the Mass?
A: The Mass is the sacrifice of the New Law in which Christ, through the
ministry of the priest, offers Himself to God in an unbloody manner
under the appearances of bread and wine.
Q: What is meant by sacrifice?
A: A sacrifice is the offering of a victim by a priest to God alone, and the
destruction of it in some way to acknowledge that He is the Creator of
all things.
Q: What are the conditions for receiving Communion?
A: The conditions for receiving communion are:
One must be free from mortal sin, to have a right intention, and to
obey the Church’s laws on the fast required before Holy Communion
(one hour from all food and drink, except water).
Q: What is a monstrance?
A: A monstrance is a sacred vessel in which the host is held and displayed
for the purpose of exposition and adoration of Jesus in the Blessed
Sacrament.
Q: What is absolution (in the sacrament of penance)?
A: Absolution is the freeing from sin by God through the priest.
Q: Is it sufficient to tell our sins privately to God for obtaining
A: forgiveness?
Confession of mortal sins is always necessary. By prayer one may be
forgiven venial sins. Mortal sin may also be forgiven by an act of
perfect contrition but must always include the intention to go to
confession.
Q: What is an examination of conscience?
A: Examination of conscience is a sincere effort to call to mind all the
sins we have committed since our last worthy confession.
Q: What is contrition? Explain the two kinds of contrition.
A: Contrition is sincere sorrow for having offended God, and hatred for
the sins we have committed, with a firm purpose of sinning no more.
The two kinds of contrition are perfect contrition, and imperfect
contrition. Perfect contrition is when we are sorry for our sins because
sin offends God whom we love above all things for His own sake.
Imperfect contrition is when we are sorry for our sins because they are
hateful in themselves or because we fear God’s punishment.
Q: Does communal penance substitute for confession? Explain?
A: No, communal penance may only be received in unusual
circumstances. To receive forgiveness in this way, one must intend to
confess later any mortal sins that were forgiven.
Q: What happens if we forget a sin in confession? What happens if we
A: deliberately withhold a sin in confession?
If without our fault we forget to confess a mortal sin, we are forgiven
and may receive Holy Communion. The mortal sin must yet be
confessed at the next confession when it is recalled.
If we deliberately withhold a sin in confession no sins we have
confessed are forgiven; moreover, we commit another mortal sin of
sacrilege.
Q: What is meant by the seal of confession?
A: By the seal of confession is meant that the priest is bound never to
reveal any sin that has been confessed to him.
Q: How do we make up for the punishment due to our sins once they
A: have been forgiven?
We can make up for the punishment due to our sins by performing the
penance imposed after confession and by prayer, attending Mass,
fasting, almsgiving, the works of mercy, the patient endurance of
sufferings, and indulgences.
Q: What is an indulgence?
A: An indulgence is the remission of all or some of the temporal
punishment due to our sins.
Q: What is the purpose of the sacrament of the Anointing of the Sick?
A: The purpose of the sacrament of the Anointing of the Sick is to give
health and strength to the soul, and sometimes to the body, when we
are in danger of death from sickness, accident, or old age.
Q: What are the three degrees of the sacrament of holy Orders?
A: The three degrees of Holy Orders are those of deacon, priest, and
bishop.
Q: What is the reason that God gave us marriage?
A: God gave us the sacrament of marriage to create new human life and
for a man to love his wife as Christ loves the Church and for a woman
to love her husband as the Church submits to Christ. Man and woman
freely bind themselves for life in a marriage and receive the grace
from God to discharge their duties.
Q: What is a sacramental? Give examples of sacramentals.
A: Sacramentals are holy things or actions which the Church uses to
obtain spiritual and temporal favors from God. Sacramentals include
blessings given by priests and bishops; holy water, blessed objects.
